# Spec-seq experiments with CRX homeodomain and its variants
This directory contains all scripts and metadata information used to process and analyze Spec-seq data. The scripts should be run in the numbered order. All the intermediate and processed data generated are stored under the `processed_data` folder. The raw data can be downloaded from [GEO](link_to_specseq_GEO).

## Brief description of scripts and metadata files
- `M_library.txt` and `Mrev_library.txt` each contains all k-mers in the corresponding Spec-seq library and will be used as reference by `calculate_ratios.py`.
- `specseq_meta.csv` contains metadata information of all Spec-seq samples to be quantified and is formatted as

| Sample name | Raw FASTQ directory | Output directory prefix | Path to library mapping | FASTQ file name identifier |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| wt_1 | Full path to raw wt_1 fq.gz directory | Output directory | Full path to directory with library mapping | Identifier for fq.gz file (if different from sample name) |
- `parseFastqAndCalculateRBE.sh` is a wrapper script to run the Spec-seq quantification pipeline.
  - `fastqCountMotifs.sh` is first called to parse, extract, and pre-count the testing sequences based on the constant flanking sequences. An intermediate `counts.tmp` will be generated.
  - `calculate_ratios.py` will then be called to calculate relative binding energy from the raw counts matrix.
  - A relative binding energy (RBE) matrix for each sample is generated from the pipeline and will be stored under the `./processed_data/RBE` folder.
- `RBE_to_ePWM.ipynb` is used to generate energy models from RBE matrix by multiple linear regression. This notebook also contains additional functions for exploring the energy models.
  - By default, the energy models are generated with the [`scikit-learn`](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LinearRegression.html) package. The energy models are written in `./processed_data/specseq_ewm_sklearn.txt`.
  - `specseq_mlr.R` provides an `R` alternative to the python implementation. Codes in this script are written based on the ['TFCookbook'](https://github.com/zeropin/TFCookbook) R package. The energy models are written in `./processed_data/specseq_ewm_mlr.txt`.
  
## Prerequisites
- python=3.9.6
- ipython=7.26.0
- numpy=1.20.3
- pandas=1.3.2
- scipy=1.7.1
- sklearn=0.24.2
- matplotlib=3.4.2
- jupyterlab=3.2.4
- R=4.1.1

## Reference
- An in-depth review of Spec-seq can be found at [Stormo and Zhao, 2010](http://genetics.wustl.edu/bio5488/files/2017/02/Stormo2010.pdf).
- All modeling principles are documented in [Zuo, 2021](https://www.lidsen.com/journals/genetics/genetics-05-03-134#).