# RNA-seq experiments in wild-type and mutant mouse retinas
This directory contains all scripts and metadata information used to process, analyze, and visualize RNA-seq data obtained from wild-type and CRX HD mutant mouse retinas at two ages, P10 and P21. The scripts should be run in the numbered order. Processed data needed to generate manuscript figures are stored under the `processed_data` folder. The raw data and additional processed data can be downloaded from [GEO](link_to_rnaseq_GEO).

## Brief description of the RNA-seq analysis pipeline
All the analyses were performed on the WashU HTCF using SLURM.
1. **Assessing quality and adpater trimming:** `QC_trimgalore_RNA.sbatch` performs adapter trimming by `trimgalore/0.6.1` on the raw FASTQ files and runs two quality control checks of the FASTQ files by `fastqc/0.11.7` before and after the trimming. The trimmed fq.gz files will be written to a new folder `./trim`. The output from FastQC will be written to the sub-directory `./trim/fastq_files`.
2. **Alignment to the genome:** `alignment_kallisto_RNA.sbatch` aligns trimmed reads to the `mm10` genome and performs quantification of gene expression using the `kallisto/0.46.2`. The abundance matrix for each sample will be written to a new directory `./abundances` with each sample in a separate sub-directory.
3. **Differential expression analysis:** `differential_expression_DEseq2_RNA.sbatch` is a wrapper script to run the two R scripts.
   - `annotate_kallisto.R` is a helper script to convert kallisto output 'pseudocount' matrix to standard count matrix for use with DESeq2 by R package `tximport\1.18.0`.
   - `DEseq2_RNA.R` performs differential expression analysis on P10 and P21 RNA-seq data separately. The normalized count matrix and differential expression matrix were extracted, compiled, and written to `collapsed_norm_counts.tsv` and `compiled_hdmuts_lfc.tsv` under the `./processed_data` folder.
4. **Functional analysis:** `GOEnrichementAnalysis.ipynb` performs Gene Ontology (GO) enrichement analysis with the R package `clusterProfiler\4.0.5`. This notebook also contains additional functions to explore the GO analysis results.

## Metadata files
- `trimming_lookup.csv` lists all raw FASTQ file pairs for each RNA-seq sample.
- `kallisto_lookup.csv` lists all trimmed FASTQ file pairs for each RNA-seq sample.
